5. EVALUATION
5.1 Setup
The experimental part of the paper uses Llama2-7B as the base model, adapting Llama2 via NetLLM in order to fulfil the three network tasks VP, ABR and CJS. The authors generated different simulated environments for testing to fully evaluate the performance of the model. Different baselines were used for comparison for different tasks, including learning-based algorithms (TRACK, GENET, Decima) and rule-based algorithms (e.g., linear regression, BBA, FIFO, etc.). For performance metrics, Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Quality of User Experience (QoE) scores and Job Completion Time (JCT) are used. Lower MAE, higher QoE and lower JCT indicate better performance.
5.2 General Evaluation
The first is a general evaluation, where the NetLLM-adapted Llama2 and other methods are evaluated in a test environment with the same setup as the training environment. Figure 10 shows the performance comparison of the different approaches in three different tasks. It can be significantly observed that NetLLM-adapted Llama2 outperforms the other approaches in all the tasks, significantly reducing MAE, improving QoE and reducing JCT.
 
5.3 Generalization
The paper then goes on to show a generalized evaluation of NetLLM-adapted Llama2. All methods were tested by generating environments with various settings different from the training environment. NetLLM-adapted Llama2 performed better in all test environments. Where traditional DNN models perform poorly in these unseen environments (GENET), the NetLLM framework demonstrates greater generalization. For the final experiment of the generalization ability evaluation, the authors of the paper tested and evaluated NetLLM-adapted Llama2 in a real-world client-server ABR system under different network connections. The results show that NetLLM-adapted Llama2 performs well and can be used in real-world applications.
 
6. Insights And Extra Idea
6.1 Cons of NetLLM
The strengths of the NetLLM framework have been explained in detail in parts 3 and 4 of this report. So here we will only talk about the shortcomings of the NetLLM framework. The first is the computational overhead of the NetLLM framework. Although there are model compression techniques that can be used to try to mitigate the computational overhead, there is still a need to carefully weigh the relationship between performance and resource consumption in real-world applications. The second is that the success of the NetLLM framework in testing is somewhat dependent on the pre-trained knowledge of LLM. This can lead to limitations in specific domains or tasks in the future. The last is because the NetLLM framework does not yet have a deep enough understanding of the internal workings of the network domain, which limits its interpretability and trustworthiness in some applications.
6.2 Extra Thoughts
By reading this paper we appreciate the powerful generalization and migratability of LLMs. The success of the NetLLM framework represents the opening of a new field of combining LLMs with network optimization, providing new ideas and methods for wireless network intelligence. It also inspires readers to use it for exploring and trying new methods and tools when faced with complex problems.
In future research, the potential of the NetLLM framework for other network-related tasks, such as intrusion detection and network identification software, should be explored in depth. At the same time, more efficient fine-tuning methods are sought to achieve the goal of being able to further reduce computational resources and time consumption. The NetLLM framework is not only of academic interest, but may also have a profound impact on the design and optimization of physical network systems. In addition, the excellent design of NetLLM framework also has the potential of cross-domain application. For example, the multimodal encoder and network header provide new solutions to the problem of handling complex, multimodal data.
In conclusion, the NetLLM framework not only shows great potential in handling complex network tasks but also has a wide range of applications.
